How are you?
NOTE CONF
Okay, let's get started.
And, uh.
NOTE CONF
Hi.
So today we're going to start talking about back propagation.
NOTE CONF
Uh, this was meant to be on Friday, and we
didn't get to it because of the storm.
NOTE CONF
Um, I have compressed the rest of the course so
that we can make up for the for the missing
NOTE CONF
lecture.
Um, back propagation is obviously important, so I haven't compressed
NOTE CONF
this.
I've just moved it.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and, uh, I'll start by actually giving you a
brief recap of the perceptron, which is what we talked
NOTE CONF
about on Thursday.
All right.
NOTE CONF
Here's also the wall clock in case people haven't signed
up.
NOTE CONF
Give you a second or 2 or 2 to scan
the QR code.
NOTE CONF
And then we'll start with the perceptron.
So just to to remind you of the big picture,
NOTE CONF
the big picture is one where we want to basically
learn from input patterns to generate output patterns.
NOTE CONF
So this could be, I don't know, sensory information coming
in let's say from the retina.
NOTE CONF
And the output is an object classification right.
We want to recognise dogs and cats and so on.
NOTE CONF
Or if you are in the speech domain then the
input could be the speech signal and the output could
NOTE CONF
then be the word that you've just heard.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So in this general idea of associating inputs with outputs
Um, that underlies essentially all of machine learning.
NOTE CONF
But in our case, it's also the basis of modelling
certain cognitive functions.
NOTE CONF
And in particular, this is a purely empirical approach where
you just learn from data using a very general learning
NOTE CONF
mechanism and a very general model structure without having to
posit anything innate.
NOTE CONF
You don't have to posit any rules.
If you're in the linguistic domain, you don't have to
NOTE CONF
even posit a lexicon and so on.
And but before we can talk about that aspect, we
NOTE CONF
first need to get the technicalities out of the way.
So just to remind you of the perceptron, um, this
NOTE CONF
was a very simple neural, neural inspired, uh, structure which
looks like this.
NOTE CONF
Uh, we have our inputs here, which range from x1
to xn.
NOTE CONF
For simplicity, we just assume the binary numbers and we
have our outputs y here.
NOTE CONF
In this case just one output, which we also assume
to be binary and the the cell body of the
NOTE CONF
neurone.
If you want to call it that, computes a very
NOTE CONF
simple function which is just a weighted sum of the
input.
NOTE CONF
So you have the inputs coming in, and then you
have your weights which are the weights of the connection
NOTE CONF
from the input x1 to this simple computational unit.
And the weights are called w1 to w n.
NOTE CONF
And so the input function is simply the weighted sum.
And we will call this u of x, where x
NOTE CONF
is the input and the function just computes the weighted
sum.
NOTE CONF
So w w I times w times x I over
all the i's over all the inputs.
NOTE CONF
And then how do we decide whether to generate an
output.
NOTE CONF
We pass the input through an activation function.
In this case we've assumed a simple threshold function.
NOTE CONF
If we reach a threshold of theta then we output
a one.
NOTE CONF
Otherwise we output at zero.
So it's.
NOTE CONF
You can think of it as a neurone that needs
to reach a certain activation state, a certain level of
NOTE CONF
excitation before it can fire.
And that's what's going on here.
NOTE CONF
And here again, we are assuming the activation is just
0 or 1.
NOTE CONF
And we've seen how a simple computational unit like this
can for example implement binary logical functions like and and
NOTE CONF
or not as well actually.
But there are certain functions it's not able to implement
NOTE CONF
for example XOR.
And we said that this is because certain functions can
NOTE CONF
be represented by simple lines where you have a set
of points on each side of the line.
NOTE CONF
So for example, the ones in the zero for and
or or but then there are certain other functions where
NOTE CONF
a single line is not sufficient sufficient.
And the XOR function is one of these functions because
NOTE CONF
here the output should be zero for one one and
zero zero, but it should be one for one for
NOTE CONF
zero one and one zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So we need two lines.
Or we need a curve which is something more complicated
NOTE CONF
to separate the two classes the zero class and the
one class.
NOTE CONF
And this is a non-linearly separable function.
And a single layer perceptron is not able to capture
NOTE CONF
these functions.
And so that is obviously a very serious restriction because
NOTE CONF
most interesting functions are not linearly separable.
And today we're going to talk about the multilayer perceptron,
NOTE CONF
which is really just a way of stacking simple perceptron,
simple computational units to compute more complicated functions.
NOTE CONF
And in fact the the MLP, the multi-layer perceptron can
compute arbitrary function functions.
NOTE CONF
This is actually something you could show mathematically.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Then the second question is, so we have this lovely
architecture, but where do the weights come from?
NOTE CONF
Right.
So where do you how do you get these W's
NOTE CONF
to make the model compute the right functions.
And this is the question of learning.
NOTE CONF
Of of learning the weights of computing the parameters of
the model.
NOTE CONF
And here we've used a simple idea, um, that if
we learn from examples.
NOTE CONF
So we have a set of inputs associated with the
correct outputs.
NOTE CONF
Call them targets.
So this is our training data.
NOTE CONF
This is the data we learn from right.
Everything is binary at this point.
NOTE CONF
This is not a necessary assumption but we're just making
it for simplicity.
NOTE CONF
So for example we have this input here 0100.
And then we know that the output should be one
NOTE CONF
and so on.
So we can use this data this training data to
NOTE CONF
compute what the correct weights should be.
And this is this is how we model learning here.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so, uh, and we do this by computing the
current output.
NOTE CONF
So we assume we have the weights somewhere, right?
Just assume all the weights are zero or we assign
NOTE CONF
them random numbers, but we have the weights and we
compute the current output.
NOTE CONF
And this is here an orange the O.
And then we compare the current output to the target.
NOTE CONF
So here this is incorrect.
It output zero even though the target is one this
NOTE CONF
one is correct.
The target is zero, the output is zero and so
NOTE CONF
on.
And then we essentially take this difference, this error that
NOTE CONF
the model makes and use it to adjust the weights.
So this is how learning works in the perceptron.
NOTE CONF
And we have a very simple rule where we update
a weight.
NOTE CONF
We uh by taking w I and adding a small
quantity delta w I, which we compute by taking the
NOTE CONF
difference between the target and the output right down here,
target and output, uh, multiplied by ETA.
NOTE CONF
ETA is a learning rate which allows you to control
how fast you're going to learn, how big the changes
NOTE CONF
are that you're going to make.
And x I x I is the input at this
NOTE CONF
point.
So the intuition is if there's a big input, then
NOTE CONF
you want to make larger changes as small input.
You want to make smaller changes.
NOTE CONF
And this actually works.
And if you've already been to the tutorial this week,
NOTE CONF
then you will have worked through an example where you
actually compute the weight updates and keep keep applying this
NOTE CONF
learning rule until the weights stabilised, until the weights don't
change anymore, and then learning terminates.
NOTE CONF
And if it's a function that the perceptron can learn,
then you will have learned the function at that point.
NOTE CONF
So and this is a worked example.
Um, let's just go through this quickly.
NOTE CONF
I don't want to spend too much time on the
recap.
NOTE CONF
So this is our update rule.
This is how we compute our delta.
NOTE CONF
And let's assume we have a simple example where the
weights the weight is 0.5, the threshold is zero, and
NOTE CONF
we have an input x y.
Learning rate is 0.6.
NOTE CONF
So we first compute the output right.
We need the output because otherwise we don't know what
NOTE CONF
error we're making.
So that's just y times x 0.5 times minus one
NOTE CONF
is -0.5.
This is smaller than theta.
NOTE CONF
Theta was zero so the output is zero.
And the the target what's the target.
NOTE CONF
The target is one so output is zero.
Target is one.
NOTE CONF
So it's an error.
We need to update our weights.
NOTE CONF
So we compute our delta W1 by taking the learning
rate 0.6 times the difference between the target which is
NOTE CONF
one, and the current output which is zero times minus
one, which is the input at this point.
NOTE CONF
It's the same input like here.
And we get -0.6.
NOTE CONF
So we make an update.
Current weight is 0.5.
NOTE CONF
-0.6 is -0.1.
So we reduce the weight by 0.1.
NOTE CONF
And now in this particular example I've chosen it such
that.
NOTE CONF
That's actually enough so that the new output w1 x1
where w1 is now the updated w1 gives us the
NOTE CONF
correct output.
Often you'll take multiple steps and multiple examples, or you
NOTE CONF
need to go through a training set several times to
get the correct weights.
NOTE CONF
Here the example is set up so that a single
weight update is enough to now give us the correct
NOTE CONF
output.
Okay?
NOTE CONF
And in general the learning algorithm goes as follows.
You initialise your weights randomly.
NOTE CONF
Then you look at each training example.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We have a set of examples where we know the
correct output.
NOTE CONF
You apply the learning rule right.
The one up here, and you end until you do
NOTE CONF
this, until you've seen all the Examples, and then you
repeat the whole thing until the error is either zero
NOTE CONF
or small or doesn't change anymore.
Whatever your criterion you're using, sometimes you also use a
NOTE CONF
timeout, right?
You say, let's do 100 epochs and then stop.
NOTE CONF
Because the error in realistic cases will never reach zero.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So here the for loop goes through all the training
example and the repeat until the error is small enough.
NOTE CONF
This is the epochs.
Epoch is what we call if we go through the
NOTE CONF
whole training set okay.
And often you need to go through the training set
NOTE CONF
multiple times before you reach the error.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is all great.
However it's too simple right?
NOTE CONF
Remember this is just a linear classifier.
If a problem is not linearly separable then we cannot
NOTE CONF
compute it.
So we need something more complicated.
NOTE CONF
And this is the multi-layer perceptron which is the.
that is the, uh, the object of today's lecture.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so this is what I've just talked about.
So multi-layer perceptron.
NOTE CONF
Basically, you just take lots of perceptrons of the kind
we've just seen and you stack them.
NOTE CONF
And for this to be a maximally powerful, you need
at least three layers.
NOTE CONF
You need an input layer which is one set of
neurones.
NOTE CONF
And then you have a hidden layer and an output
layer.
NOTE CONF
So the hidden layer is the is called the hidden
layer because it's not directly connected to either the input
NOTE CONF
or the output.
It's hidden in that sense, right?
NOTE CONF
It does an implicit computation that is not directly dependent
on the input and output.
NOTE CONF
So in an architecture like this uh, is called multi-layer
perceptron, obviously because it has multiple layers, the individual units
NOTE CONF
are just perceptrons, just in different colours depending on which
layer they're in.
NOTE CONF
And it's fully connected.
So that means that here we have weights.
NOTE CONF
So these lines are weights connecting each unit in each
layer to the previous layer or the subsequent layer.
NOTE CONF
So this green unit here is connected to all the
units in the input layer and all the units in
NOTE CONF
the output layer okay.
So this is a really small network.
NOTE CONF
But as you can see we already get a lot
of weights because obviously this multiplies out with the number
NOTE CONF
of units in each layer.
And this is a feed forward network, which means that
NOTE CONF
the information only flows in this way in input to
output.
NOTE CONF
There's other more complicated architectures that don't that are not
feedforward.
NOTE CONF
But this is the simplest architecture that and that's the
one we'll we'll look at here today.
NOTE CONF
You can have multiple hidden layers.
Mathematically a single hidden layer is enough to approximate any
NOTE CONF
function.
But Well.
NOTE CONF
Deep learning takes its name from the fact that the
models have lots of hidden layers, right?
NOTE CONF
They're very deep in the sense that there's lots of
these green units stacked on top of each other.
NOTE CONF
And this doesn't make the network more powerful, but it
makes it much easier to train.
NOTE CONF
Right.
Deep networks are easier to train than shallow ones, even
NOTE CONF
if they have the same number of hidden hidden units.
So that was the the inside.
NOTE CONF
That's that's behind the recent developments in neural networks.
And as I said, it's fully connected in the sense
NOTE CONF
that each layer is connected.
Each unit in a layer is connected to each unit
NOTE CONF
in a previous previous layer.
And this kind of architecture solves the problem of linear
NOTE CONF
separability, right.
So it can learn functions that are not linearly separable.
NOTE CONF
There's another change that we're going to make.
Remember in our perceptron.
NOTE CONF
What it does.
It sums up the input, and then it pipes it
NOTE CONF
through a function f, which we've called activation function.
And here we're going to vary the activation function.
NOTE CONF
So far we've assumed the step function which basically goes
from 1 to 0.
NOTE CONF
Once a threshold is reached which is here h.
But I've called theta so far.
NOTE CONF
We're moving to what's called a sigmoid function, which is
an exponential function like this which is essentially similar to
NOTE CONF
a step function.
But we've sort of cut off the the edges, right.
NOTE CONF
So it's smooth at the edges.
And it has a gradual change from 0 to 1
NOTE CONF
rather than an abrupt threshold.
And this has a bunch of advantages that will come
NOTE CONF
to in a moment.
That's why we're moving to the sigmoid function here.
NOTE CONF
There's other activation functions.
There's a whole set of maybe a dozen different activation
NOTE CONF
functions to choose from.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So again we need to find a way of finding
the weights.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the weights are the numbers associated with each connections
NOTE CONF
with the connections which you can think of as the
strength of a synapse.
NOTE CONF
Right.
If you go back to the biological metaphor and then
NOTE CONF
the red units and the green units are unit neurones
and they're connected through synapses.
NOTE CONF
Synapses are actually where the learning happens in biology.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You can change the strength of the synapse in the
sense that you can regulate when it fires, you can
NOTE CONF
modulate the threshold.
And that's what we're doing here.
NOTE CONF
Basically we're changing learning changes, the connections here, the strength
of these connections that can be zero, which means there's
NOTE CONF
no connection or there can be positive or negative values,
which means there's an excitatory or inhibitory Connection between the
NOTE CONF
two units.
Okay, so learning is now more difficult because we have
NOTE CONF
these hidden units.
And we'll talk about this in a second.
NOTE CONF
Why learning with hidden units is more complicated.
And so we need a more complicated algorithm which is
NOTE CONF
called backpropagation, which is essentially a generalisation of the perceptron
learning rule that we've already seen.
NOTE CONF
So the idea remains the same.
We minimise the error in the training set.
NOTE CONF
So this is still a supervised learning algorithm right.
So we have a training set.
NOTE CONF
And for the training examples we know the correct output.
And from that we derive the errors that the model
NOTE CONF
makes.
And the errors tell us how we need to adjust
NOTE CONF
the weights.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is this idea just written down more cleanly.
So we have our MLP our multi-layer perceptron.
NOTE CONF
We have a pattern X from our training set.
We get the output Y or O, as it's often
NOTE CONF
called, and in the rest of the lecture this will
be called oh, that's the output.
NOTE CONF
And then we compare this to the correct answer.
And we take the difference between the correct answer, what
NOTE CONF
we've called the target.
So we have a set of examples.
NOTE CONF
And for each of let's write it like this.
So x is our our input.
NOTE CONF
And so on.
And for each of these we have the correct answer
NOTE CONF
which we call t.
And then we compute the the actual output of the
NOTE CONF
network at this point.
And this may be the same or may be different.
NOTE CONF
And the learning happens by taking these differences between the
target and the and the correct output.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And in the perceptron learning rule actually we wrote this
NOTE CONF
directly T minus o.
And here it's slightly more complicated but not much more
NOTE CONF
complicated.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And so we go through all the axes for all
the examples, through all the examples in the training set.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Um, as I said, this was the perceptron learning rule
NOTE CONF
which we've just seen.
So we take t minus.
NOTE CONF
Oh right.
The target that we want to have in blue and
NOTE CONF
the actual output that we're seeing in black here.
And this gives us our error if these two are
NOTE CONF
the same right.
Do I have an example like this.
NOTE CONF
Let's assume they're the same here.
Then the error is zero.
NOTE CONF
Nothing to learn here as well.
Here, however, the target and the output are different.
NOTE CONF
So that's something I can learn from.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So it's this quantity here.
And then we have our ETA which controls how how
NOTE CONF
quickly we learn how big the changes are that we
make.
NOTE CONF
And we have the x which is the output at
that point.
NOTE CONF
So if you think of this as a network work,
like here.
NOTE CONF
Then you have your.
Uh, you have your inputs, and you're adjusting this weight.
NOTE CONF
So you want to make this dependent on the input,
right?
NOTE CONF
Because the overall error.
Right.
NOTE CONF
You're interested in all the errors here.
Depends on how big the input is at that point.
NOTE CONF
If it's if the input is large, then you get
more of an error.
NOTE CONF
So this is why this is weighted by XI okay.
So in order to make this work in in the
NOTE CONF
general case with various activation functions but also in a
larger network, we need something slightly more complicated than just
NOTE CONF
taking the difference here between T and O.
Um, we actually compute an error function e of w
NOTE CONF
uh, where w is a vector of weights.
So let's assume that all the weights in our network,
NOTE CONF
and we take this by taking the the error t
minus.
NOTE CONF
Oh just like here for a given pattern p.
And we square it so that it's positive.
NOTE CONF
And then we sum this over all the training examples.
And then we just have a simple constant here which
NOTE CONF
is one over 2NN is the number of training examples
training patterns okay.
NOTE CONF
So this gives us the overall error not over a
single output in target but over all the targets and
NOTE CONF
outputs okay.
And then we square this to make this positive.
NOTE CONF
So n is the number of patterns p is the
pattern T is the target owes the output.
NOTE CONF
And the two is really just there for mathematical convenience.
It's just a constant okay.
NOTE CONF
So this was quite a lot of stuff.
So let's take a take a step back and look
NOTE CONF
at a few things that are entailed by what I've
said and think about.
NOTE CONF
For example the error function we've just seen.
Also think about conceptually what's going on.
NOTE CONF
Think about the activation functions and so on.
So I have a few questions prepared.
NOTE CONF
So in case you haven't scanned the QR code now's
a good time.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's get started.
NOTE CONF
So I have just assumed that our architecture is a
feedforward architecture where we have multiple layers and they are
NOTE CONF
connected to each other.
What kind of other architectures could you imagine?
NOTE CONF
Could we use lots of layers?
I've already indicated that that's that's possible.
NOTE CONF
Could we use maybe backwards connections?
Could we use connections within the same layer connection that
NOTE CONF
skip layers?
Could we use something called attention which you may have
NOTE CONF
heard about?
So how would you make this even more complicated and
NOTE CONF
maybe more powerful?
What kind of alternative architectures?
NOTE CONF
Here we'll just talk about feedforward networks.
Multilayer perceptrons.
NOTE CONF
But there's a lot of different architectures out there.
I want to.
NOTE CONF
Thank you all.
So Thank you.
NOTE CONF
Thank you so.
Much.
NOTE CONF
Thank you.
Thank.
NOTE CONF
You.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at a few examples.
So what do people think?
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So more or less everything possible.
NOTE CONF
Maybe.
Attention.
NOTE CONF
People don't like that much.
So.
NOTE CONF
Let's look at each of the examples.
So first of all let's look at the things that
NOTE CONF
actually make sense.
So connections within the same layer.
NOTE CONF
So you might be wondering is this actually possible?
Well, you can have these connections of units to themselves
NOTE CONF
or of the layer to itself.
And this is called the recurrent connection.
NOTE CONF
And actually in the next lecture we will see an
example.
NOTE CONF
Very high level.
But we'll see an example of a network that uses
NOTE CONF
recurrent connections.
So you might think that is really silly.
NOTE CONF
Why would you connect it to yourself.
But this makes sense because you can then model information
NOTE CONF
that flows over time.
That where the recurrent connection corresponds to different time steps.
NOTE CONF
So this is actually a clever thing.
Then this number four was connections that skip layers.
NOTE CONF
So for example we could have a connection like this
that skips that layer here.
NOTE CONF
That is also possible.
This is Um, a so-called bottleneck connection.
NOTE CONF
And in, let's say, about 4 to 5 years ago,
this type of architecture was very common in computer vision
NOTE CONF
models.
So again, it's not something we'll talk about here, but
NOTE CONF
it's a possible connection.
I need to remove this because I want to use.
NOTE CONF
The diagram later on.
Let's quickly talk about the others.
NOTE CONF
Lots of layers.
Um, yes, that's fine.
NOTE CONF
But that's not really an alternative to using forward connections.
Backward connections.
NOTE CONF
It's not entirely clear what this would mean.
So let's assume these are forward connections and then backward
NOTE CONF
connections like this.
Um these are type of recurrent connections as well.
NOTE CONF
So it's this is not commonly used but it would
not be impossible.
NOTE CONF
Attention is a different mechanism that people have used, for
example, in Transformers, and it's not something that we'll talk
NOTE CONF
about in this in this course, but it's basically a
way of selecting your input or figuring out which parts
NOTE CONF
of the input are most important and learning separate weights
for that.
NOTE CONF
So that's also possible.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So now let's think about the activation function.
Remember we we take a add a unit here.
NOTE CONF
We take all the inputs.
We multiply them with the weight.
NOTE CONF
And then we pass the weighted sum through an activation
function.
NOTE CONF
So we've said we are going to use the sigmoid
function rather than the step function.
NOTE CONF
Why do you think this is good.
Here's the number of possible solutions.
NOTE CONF
Sigmoid function is easy to compute.
It's differentiable.
NOTE CONF
It returns a continuous value, not just zero and one.
The derivative is easy to compute.
NOTE CONF
Which of these things do you think are important?
Do you?
NOTE CONF
Think.
What do we do?
NOTE CONF
What do?
We.
NOTE CONF
Do.
Okay, let's have a look.
NOTE CONF
All right.
So.
NOTE CONF
Uh, differentiable and derivative.
Easy to compute.
NOTE CONF
Is is the most important properties.
Um, the sigmoid function is easy to compute, but so
NOTE CONF
is the threshold function.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So it's not really an advantage.
It's differentiable.
NOTE CONF
Whereas the step function of course here at our threshold
it's not differentiable, right?
NOTE CONF
It goes to infinity.
And that can be a problem.
NOTE CONF
And we'll see why in a moment.
Returns continuous values.
NOTE CONF
Yeah we don't really care.
Either way.
NOTE CONF
We can set up the threshold function so that it
returns continuous values.
NOTE CONF
The derivative is easy to compute.
That's also something we will care about.
NOTE CONF
Okay here we don't even have a derivative at all
points right.
NOTE CONF
So that's why the function isn't good.
And last one.
NOTE CONF
So this error function which I've given you here again
where we take the target and the output and we
NOTE CONF
take the difference and square it.
And then we sum this up over all the input
NOTE CONF
patterns of all the training patterns.
Is it something that maybe you've seen before in other
NOTE CONF
contexts?
And here's a few possibilities.
NOTE CONF
So is it like the perceptron error function?
Is it like the variance in statistics?
NOTE CONF
Have you seen this in the context of linear regression?
Perhaps.
NOTE CONF
Or maybe it's a statistical estimator.
So this term is hopefully or maybe familiar to some
NOTE CONF
of you.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Sure.
My answers.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Variants.
NOTE CONF
Most of you like variants.
So all these all three things are correct.
NOTE CONF
So I mean, arguably even one is correct because we
have the T minus.
NOTE CONF
All right.
Which is similar to what we have in the perceptron
NOTE CONF
error function.
But the variance in statistics is basically defined like this.
NOTE CONF
Except that we write this as the mean right.
So it's the difference between the individual points and the
NOTE CONF
mean in linear regression.
This mean squared error is actually the error that we
NOTE CONF
use to fit the line right.
In regression we have a bunch of points.
NOTE CONF
And then we fit the line that's closest to those
points.
NOTE CONF
And these distances here they're called residuals in in regression
terminology.
NOTE CONF
But these are the errors.
And we fit the line.
NOTE CONF
So that minimises the error.
So it actually minimises the same error function that we're
NOTE CONF
minimising here.
And you can actually show that certain architectures of neural
NOTE CONF
networks are equivalent to linear regression.
And in statistics this is a moment based maximum entropy
NOTE CONF
maximum likelihood estimator.
But that's sort of a yeah, sort of, you know,
NOTE CONF
if you're interested in that kind of thing.
So there's a connection to statistical estimation as well.
NOTE CONF
So this is of course no coincidence.
Right.
NOTE CONF
This error function was chosen to do something meaningful.
And that is something that occurs in other contexts such
NOTE CONF
as regression or statistical estimation as well.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's go back to.
Yeah.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So now we're going to talk about gradient descent which
NOTE CONF
is at the heart of backpropagation.
And I'll start with an intuition.
NOTE CONF
So what we want to do now is to update
the weights which I've written slightly differently.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So the weights now have two indices indicating the unit
NOTE CONF
that.
So this is unit j and this is unit I.
NOTE CONF
So and the weight that connects the two is called
w I j right.
NOTE CONF
We have a more complicated structure.
Everything has multiple weights.
NOTE CONF
So we need slightly more complicated indices.
So we update this w I j by taking the
NOTE CONF
previous uh weight w I j and adding a small
delta.
NOTE CONF
So at that abstract level, it's exactly the same thing
that we did for perceptrons.
NOTE CONF
So and now the question is of course how do
we get our delta ij.
NOTE CONF
And the idea is.
So we have painstakingly defined this error function.
NOTE CONF
Why don't we pick the why?
To minimise that error function function.
NOTE CONF
And how do you minimise functions.
Well this is something that you should remember from high
NOTE CONF
school math.
The derivative is very useful when you want to minimise
NOTE CONF
functions.
That's also why we wanted the activation function to be
NOTE CONF
differentiable, because otherwise it would be very hard to compute
the derivative.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So and this is exploited in a technique called gradient
NOTE CONF
descent which takes the error function.
So here it's a simple parabola.
NOTE CONF
And then on the y axis we have the error.
On the x axis we have the possible values for
NOTE CONF
the weight.
In this case it's just a single weight.
NOTE CONF
If you have multiple weights then this would be a
multi-dimensional space, right?
NOTE CONF
If you have two weights it will be three dimensional
and so on.
NOTE CONF
And we want to go to this point here where
the error is minimal.
NOTE CONF
And then we take the weight at that point.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
And of course we're starting with random weights.
We're initialising the weights in in a random way so
NOTE CONF
we can be anywhere on this parabola.
And we need to find the minimum.
NOTE CONF
Right.
So and doing the step by step, let's say we're
NOTE CONF
starting here.
And then we're moving towards the minimum.
NOTE CONF
And then we're stopping here.
This is called gradient descent because we're going along the
NOTE CONF
gradient.
So along the derivative to try and find the minimum.
NOTE CONF
And then we stop right when the error is minimal
okay.
NOTE CONF
So this sounds great as a concept but how does
it work in practice.
NOTE CONF
So as I've said the derivative is useful here because
it indicates the rate of change of a function.
NOTE CONF
So let's assume we have a function y equals f
of x.
NOTE CONF
Then the derivative is dy dx and it indicates how
much the function how much y changes in response to
NOTE CONF
a change in X.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So again if you remember from from high school hopefully
that uh, if you have our function here in blue
NOTE CONF
then the derivative is a tangent line.
Uh, and the slope of that line indicates the um
NOTE CONF
whether the function is going up or down.
Essentially the direction of change.
NOTE CONF
Uh, so we want to look at the slope or
gradient for our gradient descent.
NOTE CONF
Right.
We want to move along the error function to find
NOTE CONF
the minimum bit by bit.
So and if the derivative is bigger than zero then
NOTE CONF
that implies that y increases as x increases.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So we're going this way.
So we need to move in the opposite direction to
NOTE CONF
reach the minimum.
If the derivative is smaller than zero then y decreases
NOTE CONF
as x increases.
So we're moving this way.
NOTE CONF
So we're moving towards the minimum.
So we need to keep increasing x.
NOTE CONF
If the derivative is zero then we found the minimum
or the maximum or a plateau where the function doesn't
NOTE CONF
change.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So that brings us to the following idea.
If we want to move closer to the minimum then
NOTE CONF
we need to update our x value.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So the value here on the parabola from the old
value minus the derivative.
NOTE CONF
And eta is again our learning rate.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So either increase or decrease the x and okay.
So that sounds good.
NOTE CONF
But how do we do this for our weights.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
Let's take stock first.
So we have looked at multilayer perceptrons.
NOTE CONF
We have looked at the learning rule here which is
essentially the same as our perception learning rule.
NOTE CONF
And now the delta y needs to tell us the
direction of the change and how much we need to
NOTE CONF
change each weight, and for that, we're hoping to set
it up so that we follow our error function, and
NOTE CONF
the direction will be indicated by the slope, by the
gradient, by the derivative of that error function.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So how do we calculate this.
NOTE CONF
And this is called the generalised delta rule or perceptron.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Or MLP update rule okay.
So this is just our error function again.
NOTE CONF
How do we compute the oh here.
Right.
NOTE CONF
The output we need to take our input UI.
Apply the activation function.
NOTE CONF
This slightly complicated term is the sigmoid function, right?
Where a is the constant and u is the input.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So this gives us the the curvy threshold function here.
NOTE CONF
And how do we get the U.
Well as before we just do the weighted sum of
NOTE CONF
the inputs x is the input w I j is
the weights.
NOTE CONF
So this u goes in here.
This gives us the o.
NOTE CONF
And the o goes into the error function here.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
But how do we then turn this into a weight
update.
NOTE CONF
Well we compute the difference between t and O as
before the target and the output.
NOTE CONF
Then we look at the derivative of our input right.
So this is the this here the activation function we
NOTE CONF
look at the derivative.
This tells us which direction we're moving, whether we need
NOTE CONF
to decrease or increase the weights, and then we multiply
it by the input, which is x I j.
NOTE CONF
Just like in the perceptron learning rule.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is basically a fancier version of the perceptron
learning rule where we've stuck in the derivative derivative.
NOTE CONF
Here f I ui to be able to figure out
which direction we should be moving in.
NOTE CONF
So f f prime of UI is the derivative.
So that's df over.
NOTE CONF
DUI.
DUI was our our input function.
NOTE CONF
And for the sigmoid function the derivative is.
This is AF times f of ui times one minus
NOTE CONF
f of UI.
Okay, so if we have this sigmoid as our activation
NOTE CONF
function, then the derivative as promised, the derivative is really
easy to compute.
NOTE CONF
So we can just plug this term in here.
And then we're essentially done.
NOTE CONF
Um note that this is specific to this particular error
function and this particular activation function.
NOTE CONF
In the literature people have decided that other error functions
are also.
NOTE CONF
Other error functions are also useful.
Sorry.
NOTE CONF
Here we have assumed this function right.
The mean squared error.
NOTE CONF
Other error functions are possible and we have assumed this
activation function, but other activation functions are also possible.
NOTE CONF
However, if we make these two assumptions mean squared error
and sigmoid function, then we can compute the derivative like
NOTE CONF
this.
And our perceptron learning rule becomes really easy.
NOTE CONF
See.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
In order to generalise this a little bit.
We take the blue bits here, which is the magnitude
NOTE CONF
and the direction of the error.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So this is the magnitude and this is the direction
of the error.
NOTE CONF
And we just write it as delta pi where p
is the pattern and is the the weight we're updating.
NOTE CONF
And this is known as the generalised delta rule.
And now we have one problem.
NOTE CONF
And this is really where sort of the all the
magic happens in back propagation.
NOTE CONF
Let's see.
So let's here we've just substituted this by delta.
NOTE CONF
But let's go one step back.
So let's try to actually compute these things.
NOTE CONF
So f prime of UI easy to compute right.
We just need to to sum up the input times
NOTE CONF
the weight.
Take the derivative using this function here.
NOTE CONF
Fine.
This here.
NOTE CONF
Also easy to compute.
I just take the the target pattern and the output
NOTE CONF
and the difference.
So that is the case for let's say this unit
NOTE CONF
here which has these inputs.
And I can just take in each case I can
NOTE CONF
take the the target.
So I know the target here.
NOTE CONF
And I can compute.
Uh no sorry I have written this the wrong way
NOTE CONF
around.
So sorry.
NOTE CONF
This is my input.
And then the output, let's say.
NOTE CONF
So the output.
So I and the target is here.
NOTE CONF
So I can just compute the difference.
And then I can update this weight.
NOTE CONF
But what if I want to update that weight.
Wait.
NOTE CONF
What is the problem there?
So here.
NOTE CONF
This weight is easy.
I plug in the O and the T.
NOTE CONF
If I want to update that.
Wait, do I have an output here?
NOTE CONF
Do I have a target here?
Output is actually possible to compute right.
NOTE CONF
It's just the the weighted sum.
But I don't have a target.
NOTE CONF
Right.
It's a hidden unit and it's called hidden unit because
NOTE CONF
it's not directly connected to the inputs X or the
outputs O or y.
NOTE CONF
And that means I don't have a target.
So how can I learn.
NOTE CONF
So that's the problem with the hidden units right.
So here if I adjust the weight that's directly connected
NOTE CONF
to an output unit, then I know the correct answer.
If I want to adjust the weight that's connected to
NOTE CONF
a hidden unit, then I don't know the correct answer.
And the idea is to distribute, to take the errors
NOTE CONF
from here and distribute them.
Distribute them across all the inputs.
NOTE CONF
So this is what backpropagation does, right?
You you compute all the outputs at each at each
NOTE CONF
unit.
So here and here.
NOTE CONF
And then you can compute the error.
At.
NOTE CONF
This point.
And you take the error at this point to also
NOTE CONF
adjust the errors at that point.
So that seems a bit magic but it's actually relatively
NOTE CONF
straightforward.
So let's start with the generalised delta rule.
NOTE CONF
So remember we want to compute delta w I j.
And this is our delta which is our update times
NOTE CONF
the learning rate times the input.
And we've computed the delta by taking the difference between
NOTE CONF
the target and the output and the derivative to know
which direction we need to move on.
NOTE CONF
So this doesn't work for hidden units.
So what do we do for hidden units instead?
NOTE CONF
For hidden units instead of the arrow here in blue?
We compute the error at the previous layer and weighted
NOTE CONF
by the weights, and sum this all up.
So let's assume we have more outputs here.
NOTE CONF
Uh one two.
So we can compute the delta here and here right.
NOTE CONF
That's easy.
We can use the first equation here because we have
NOTE CONF
the targets.
So here we have a target.
NOTE CONF
Here we have a target.
And that gives us these two deltas.
NOTE CONF
But let's assume we want to adjust this weight here.
Then what we do is instead of relying on the
NOTE CONF
output we take the deltas from here and from here
and we add these deltas and each of them weighted
NOTE CONF
by the connection.
So basically we're saying okay so you have a certain
NOTE CONF
output at this point.
And this output depends on these weights.
NOTE CONF
And these weights are responsible for the error to some
extent.
NOTE CONF
Right.
This weight is responsible for the error at this output.
NOTE CONF
This is responsible for the error this output.
And we take these errors in terms of the deltas.
NOTE CONF
And we sum them up to compute the weight update
here okay.
NOTE CONF
So we basically distribute the error over all the previous
over the whole previous layer.
NOTE CONF
So this is this is why we're writing here delta
k.
NOTE CONF
So this is the delta of the previous layer.
And we update this by the weight between I which
NOTE CONF
is the current the current weight we're updating.
And this k that the delta belongs to.
NOTE CONF
And we sum this this up.
So over here we sum up over the over the
NOTE CONF
deltas and so we can get a delta at this
point.
NOTE CONF
We're basically distributing the blame.
Right.
NOTE CONF
We know that at some point there is the output.
And at that point we know the error.
NOTE CONF
But we're distributing this across all the units that were
involved in generating this output.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
And we call this delta AI.
NOTE CONF
So now we have a version of this update that
we can apply to the output units and to the
NOTE CONF
hidden units.
Okay.
NOTE CONF
So this is a lot to take in.
But we have a few minutes for a quick quiz.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
So let's actually let's skip this just in the interest
NOTE CONF
of time.
So I have written down the different delta rules here.
NOTE CONF
And I would like you to associate them with the
correct.
NOTE CONF
expression.
So Delta rule for hidden units.
NOTE CONF
Delta rule for output units.
That rule for the perceptron, which we've seen from last
NOTE CONF
time.
I have left out the ETA the the learning rate.
NOTE CONF
Or.
Something like that.
NOTE CONF
Okay.
Let's quickly look at the correct answer.
NOTE CONF
So most people got this correct.
This is the one for Uh.
NOTE CONF
This is the one for the hidden units.
This is the one for the perceptron, which doesn't have
NOTE CONF
the derivative in it.
And this is the one for the output.
NOTE CONF
Okay, so we're out of time, but I'll leave you
with a, uh, quick animation.
NOTE CONF
So why?
Why is this even called backpropagation?
NOTE CONF
Right.
You might have been wondering.
NOTE CONF
Uh, and this you can, you can illustrate with an
animation quite easily.
NOTE CONF
So we have our input.
This is the axis here x1, x2, x3.
NOTE CONF
You have your output y which is your prediction.
And then you have the correct output which we've called
NOTE CONF
t.
And the difference is the error.
NOTE CONF
So you start by doing forward propagation.
Right.
NOTE CONF
So you you compute the output at this layer at
the second layer third layer.
NOTE CONF
And then you get the overall output.
This allows you to calculate your error.
NOTE CONF
And then you.
You do the update here at the output right which
NOTE CONF
is just error minus output t minus.
Oh.
NOTE CONF
And then the updates here at the hidden layers you
do by taking the deltas right.
NOTE CONF
So you go back.
So you basically do forward propagation to calculate calculate the
NOTE CONF
error.
And then you do back propagation in the opposite direction
NOTE CONF
to calculate the output.
This is the learning algorithm and I'm afraid we're out
NOTE CONF
of time.
Uh I'll skip the remaining quiz.
NOTE CONF
Thank you very much.